# Abstract

In an era of grave threats to the world’s collective goods—most importantly, peace, health, and the natural environment—international cooperation is more important than ever. Nation-states and multilateral institutions have failed to catalyze meaningful action against climate change, political violence, epidemic diseases, and a host of other pressing issues. We propose a new governance framework: a Global Cooperative (henceforth “the Cooperative”) that pools the ideas and resources of individuals across the world in a digital network, and directs these resources towards sustainable governance of the world’s collective goods. Members of the Cooperative are best described as citizen-trustees: citizens of a new global community, and trustees of the human and natural capital that will support future generations.

All people in the world are eligible to be citizen-trustees of the Cooperative. At the core of the Cooperative is the idea that global grassroots partnerships can make changes that more centralized institutions cannot, linking political constituencies, pooling resources, and coordinating action.

The Cooperative has the following design elements:

- a social network of ideas in which citizen-trustees work together in creating policies, programs, and projects (3Ps) to safeguard collective goods;
- a “liquid democracy” in which citizen-trustees vote—either directly or by delegating their vote to proxies—for the most promising 3Ps; and
- a collaborative economy in which the Cooperative funds the implementation of 3Ps across the world, with the benefits of 3Ps shared among citizen-trustees.

We outline the processes of the Cooperative in this abstract, and discuss the organization in more detail in the following sections. Please see Attachment 1 for a link to a brief video summarizing the Cooperative.

Any woman or man in the world above the age of 18, upon identity verification, can become a citizen-trustee of the Cooperative. After joining, each individual is granted a voting share, representing her/his right to equal political voice within the organization.

The Cooperative’s citizen-trustees are linked in an online social network that serves as an infrastructure for the co-creation of policies, programs, and projects to manage the collective goods of peace, health, and the natural environment. These 3Ps may focus on peacebuilding or conflict resolution programs (peace); strategies to provide health insurance or prevent antibiotic resistance (health); and biodiversity conservation or carbon trading schemes (nature). The design of 3Ps is informed by the local and technical expertise of citizen-trustees, and improved by the process of community feedback. A reputation scoring system rewards originators and contributors of high-quality 3Ps. Policies, programs, and projects funded by the Cooperative can also interact with states and markets—for example, by catalyzing reforms in the health care system or incubating clean energy technologies.

The Cooperative runs on a digital platform. Digital technologies, especially smartphones and computers, are rapidly expanding worldwide, and thus facilitate participation in the Cooperative, even for rural and isolated populations.

The citizen-trustees of the Cooperative exercise their voting rights in several ways, as shown in Attachment 2, “Governance of the Global Cooperative”. First, voters elect three Councils—one each for the management of peace, health, and nature—who make final decisions on the coordination and financing of 3Ps, as described below. A delegative “liquid democratic” process is used to elect the seven members of each council: all citizen-trustees may vote directly, or may choose to delegate their vote—i.e., transfer voting power—for any particular issue to a trusted proxy. Delegations can also be withdrawn at any time. In order to prevent vote-buying or other forms of manipulation, only citizen-trustees with high reputation—gained through contributions to 3P creation—may serve as delegates.

3Ps are selected in a two-stage voting process. First, all citizen-trustees (or their delegates) can vote on whether 3Ps should be considered by the Councils for final approval. As proposals are refined in response to community feedback, these votes can be revised. If 3P proposals cross a vote support threshold, they enter the relevant Council (peace, health, or nature) for second-stage voting. The Councils are responsible for choosing a coordinated set of 3Ps that restore, safeguard, and enhance the long-term value of collective goods, while providing a reasonable short-term dividend return to Cooperative shareholders. A majority vote in the relevant seven-delegate council results in financing for the 3P in question. A High Council comprised of five high-reputation Cooperative members and four individuals external to the Cooperative adjudicates any disputes that arise.

In addition to the first, free voting share, any citizen-trustee can buy investment shares in the Cooperative. There is no limit to the amount of these non-voting shares that may be purchased. The pool of capital created from the sale of shares is used to finance the operations of the cooperative, including implementation of 3Ps.

3P implementation is carried out by Cooperative members, often working in close partnership with state, market, and civil society actors. Some 3Ps—conflict prevention programs, for example—may not generate a market return for the Cooperative, but will produce social benefits for the global community. Other 3Ps—for example, carbon trading schemes or tourism proceeds from biodiversity protection—may produce a market return. Revenue generated from these 3Ps is returned to the Cooperative’s investment shareholders in the form of dividends.

To ensure security, the operations of the Cooperative, from 3P creation to voting results to financial transactions, are recorded in a blockchain—an unalterable, distributed database. In addition, the Cooperative’s activities are transacted in a new secure digital currency created for the organization.

The Global Cooperative thus has features of an online developer network, a democratic state, a savings cooperative, and a social investment fund. These parts sum to something larger, however. They are the constituent elements of a flexible, decentralized global governance structure, complete with a budget, democratic structure, and a guiding political purpose: the mobilization of ideas and resources to manage the world’s collective goods.

# Model

## Why Global Challenges Exist: The Collective Action Problem

In an era of grave threats to human civilization—climate change, the destruction of biodiversity, weapons proliferation, epidemic diseases—international cooperation is more important than ever. The United Nations and other multilateral bodies have had some success in promoting cooperation, most notably when the interests of the great powers align. But, because of undemocratic voting rules, inconsistent funding, and an inability to enforce agreements, they have not catalyzed effective action on some of the most pressing issues [1-4].

In short, the global community faces a collective action problem (CAP):  group members need assurance that they will not bear the risks and costs of action alone [5]. Nations are unwilling to unilaterally reduce greenhouse gas emissions or scale back their weapons arsenals, for instance, because they fear that others will not follow suit.

Examples of successful cooperation, however, are everywhere. At the global level, the reduction of chlorofluorocarbons, the eradication of smallpox and other diseases, and improved humanitarian access to war zones are important examples [6-8]. Locally, labor unions, social movements, and community natural resource organizations illustrate the diversity of cooperative arrangements. So why is cooperation sometimes achieved and other times not?

This is among the most important questions in politics. The existence of CAPs has been recognized for centuries, but only in the past half-century have social scientists analyzed the phenomenon systematically [9-10]. Their conclusions can be summarized by examining the two most important human institutions tasked with resolving CAPs: markets and states.

###  The Status Quo: What States and Markets Can, and Can’t, Do

Each person has unique abilities, which they use to make goods and provide services. Each person also has unique tastes; different people value the same good or service differently. The fundamental economic CAP is this: how do we exchange our labor and goods in a way that everyone agrees is fair? Adam Smith offered an answer: the invisible hand of the market, which aggregates an immense amount of information—the preferences of billions of consumers and the supply of millions of goods and services—into the single, compact signal of price [11]. When every market player has equal access to information, property rights are enforceable, and there are no major barriers to production, consumption, or trade, no one can manipulate prices. For many goods, these conditions hold relatively well.

There is a special class of goods, however, for which at least one of the above conditions does not hold: “collective goods”, which have the essential characteristic of shared public access, making property rights difficult to define and enforce. Collective goods come in two subtypes. First, public goods are those that everyone can consume without reducing the overall stock available, such as clean air, information, and health. Second, common-pool resources are goods for which consumption by one person may reduce the overall stock available for another; groundwater, forests, and fisheries are examples. The market struggles to put a price on collective goods because people who have not paid for the good may still consume it. In addition, because collective goods tend to be distributed over a large area, gathering information about each individual’s activities, and thus enforcing rules for sustainable use, is difficult [12].

Within national boundaries, states can address these problems. A central authority with the power to tax its residents, enforce agreements, and punish violators can manage collective goods well. Taxes fund the provision of public goods, for example by training security forces, building safe water systems to prevent epidemics, and offering emergency medical services. Regulations, backed by tax-funded monitoring systems, protect water basins from overuse and prevent air and water pollution. All of this is made possible by the state’s power to impose fines and prison sentences; no one can refuse to adhere to the social contract without suffering punishment. In democratic states, the social contract itself—and thus the state’s role in addressing the failures of the market—is revised by the will of the people as interests and ideas evolve.

The affairs of government, however, are also fraught with difficulty. Fairly aggregating the political views of tens of millions of voters, protecting minority rights, and balancing the needs of future generations with the exigencies of short political cycles are all problems that even the most democratic states still have not solved. But, within the borders of democratic nation-states, the mechanisms for a slow, evolving resolution of the CAP are at least in place.

This is not so at the international level. The last one hundred years of world history suggests that creating a strong, centralized global government that can correct transnational market failures by imposing taxes, regulations, and punishments may not be possible. Even in the face of existential challenges, countries value their sovereignty—or perhaps more accurately, political elites in countries, whether motivated by public spirit or personal ambition, value their autonomy—too highly to cede power to a higher body [13].

###  Peace, Health, and Nature: The World’s Collective Goods

We focus in this proposal on the governance of three global collective goods: peace, human health, and the natural environment.

Peace is a global collective good. Weapons of mass destruction pose the greatest existential threat to human society, but conventional weapons are also a major threat. Controlling the expanding arms trade will not end political violence, but will provide space to create forums for conflict prevention and resolution, helping to resolve underlying grievances. Cross-border terrorism, fueled by the spread of extreme ideologies across traditional and modern social networks, is perhaps the most striking sign of how such grievances have become globalized.

Health is a global collective good. Developing countries, with underfunded health services, unsafe water and sanitation systems, and frequent exposure to natural disasters and conflict, are especially vulnerable to infectious diseases. In an increasingly mobile and connected world, however, pandemics cross borders with ease, as the recent history of HIV/AIDS, avian influenza, and the Zika virus makes clear [14]. With respect to bacterial infections, the problem is exacerbated by the misuse of antibiotics; the resistance of pathogens to these drugs is becoming one of the world’s most serious public health problems [15]. Nutritional challenges persist across the world: undernutrition is improving, but obesity and associated diseases claim millions of lives every year [16].

Nature is a global collective good. Climate change is increasing the frequency of extreme weather events, reducing crop yields, sparking conflict, and rapidly changing ecosystem structure [17]. The loss of biodiversity is accelerating, not only due to climate change but also as a result of habitat destruction and air, water, and soil pollution; we are in the midst of one of the great mass extinction events since the beginning of life on Earth [17]. The exact social and economic costs of such destruction are unknown, but the biological foundations of agriculture, medicine, and a host of other industries are under threat [18].

In the absence of a global government, protection of these goods internationally is stymied by the collective action problem. For example, the great powers have often vetoed international attempts to control the arms trade; emerging economies argue that emissions reductions and biodiversity conservation will stunt economic growth; and pandemics are often dismissed by the industrialized world as a problem of poor countries.

###  The Quadrillion Dollar Scale: The Value of Global Collective Goods

Collective goods embody the human and natural capital that are the basis of the global economy. When war, hunger, and disease destroy livelihoods, or when ecosystems are razed for short-term profit, these stocks of capital degrade and lose value. Durable peace, high-quality health care systems, and the sustainable use of the world’s ecosystem services, in contrast, unlock human potential, engender innovation, and lead to growth in the value of human and natural capital stocks.

The stakes are very high. The net present value (NPV) of the current stock of human capital is at least $1.2 quadrillion, by one rough estimate [19]. If market and state failures were corrected and human capital developed to its full health and educational potential, this figure could increase by $800 trillion [20]. Meanwhile, the stock of natural capital—the value of all ecosystem services on the planet—is degrading by $4.3-20.2 trillion every year, according to one analysis [21-22]. Stopping, and perhaps reversing, this decline in value through effective collective goods management thus represents gains of hundreds of trillions of dollars over just the next several decades.

In the pages that follow, we describe an institutional architecture to manage global collective goods effectively. Our proposed solution is neither a state nor a market, but rather another kind of human organization specialized to address collective action problems: the cooperative. Cooperatives are groups of people who pool their stocks of human and financial capital for a democratically agreed-upon set of goals; in 2016, cooperatives across the world had a total turnover of nearly $3 trillion [23]. Unlike states, membership in cooperatives is not necessarily constrained by political borders. Unlike (most) market firms, decision-making in cooperatives is democratic, profits are shared equitably, and survival is not necessarily tied to short-term profitability or competitiveness; cooperatives can function as vehicles for long-term social change. Our proposal mixes these traditional features with a digital infrastructure to build a model for flexible collective goods governance.

## How Collective Goods are Managed: The Global Cooperative

The mission of the Global Cooperative is to involve the world’s people in the work of restoring, maintaining, and enhancing the value of the world’s collective goods. To carry out this mission, the Cooperative relies on the pooling of ideas and resources, facilitated by a digital infrastructure; global delegative (“liquid”) democracy; and a diverse, coordinated set of collective goods, policies, programs, and projects (3Ps) implemented in partnership with states and markets.

### The Core Design Principle: Empowering Individuals to Cooperate

The workings of the Cooperative are based on communication and negotiation between individuals, not nations or other identity groups. This focus on the empowerment of individuals acknowledges two fundamental facts.

First, digital infrastructures greatly lower communication and transaction costs, making widespread transnational cooperation possible. As a result, peer production—a form of labor relying on self-organized groups of individuals—has emerged as an important new mode of production [24]. Typified by flagship projects such as Linux or Wikipedia, peer production’s lack of hierarchy, contractual relationships, and direct financial compensation does not result in low-quality output or social conflict. On the contrary, peer-produced solutions tend to be as (or more) innovative, comprehensive, and resilient as private products and services. In addition, strong communities form through open, fundamentally meritocratic governance mechanisms. Reputation and transparency are central to this process: when the eyes of the community are everywhere, watching who supports and who undermines the common good, global cooperation is possible.

Second, there is clearly a strong appetite around the globe for a more participatory democratic process. Mobilization around a host of issues, in the streets and online, reflects the desire of ever-more educated citizens to be actors, rather than spectators, in the global decision-making process. Though the impact of these movements is arguably marginal, they suggest that individuals worldwide are searching for new forms of political expression that transcend national borders.

Based on these observations, we propose that global collective goods can (only) be managed by self-organized groups of individuals, through a decentralized organization complementary to states and markets.

### How the Cooperative Creates Solutions: A Network of Ideas

The Cooperative begins by conferring voting shares. Every woman and man in the world age 18 and older is entitled to a voting share in the Cooperative; this share signifies “virtual citizenship” in a global community. Through their participation in the Cooperative, these individuals serve as trustees of the world’s collective goods—temporary custodians for the next generation.

Once their identity is verified, in partnership with existing national registration systems, citizen-trustees are digitally linked to an online identity they construct themselves. Their true demographic information is protected, and they may participate in the Cooperative under an alias if they so choose. Anonymity can provide a safeguard against discrimination on the basis of sex, gender, race, class, ethnicity, age, or other markers of identity.

Citizen-trustees engage with one another within the Cooperative’s social network, a structure that enables communication, sharing of information, and co-creation of ideas to manage collective goods. This social network is accessible through digital technologies, especially smartphones and computers. While access to these technologies may still be a barrier for some individuals, the number of mobile phone subscriptions worldwide exceeded the global population in 2016, and nearly half the world is using the internet [25]. Digital technologies are now reaching even poor and isolated populations, and coverage will continue to increase; in addition, the Cooperative will prioritize enabling access to digital technologies in its initial stages of operation.

At the core of the Cooperative’s social network is an open-source platform for citizen-trustees to collaboratively build ideas on how to restore, safeguard, or enhance collective goods. Ideas can take the form of policies: guidelines for common behavior to be followed by a given community—global, national, or local—as well as mechanisms to collectively monitor and enforce these guidelines. These policies can be linked to existing policies of national states, or can be entirely new directives. Ideas can also take the form of programs: a cohesive set of projects to protect collective goods. Each program’s set of projects will be unified by a common mission, e.g., the creation of social institutions to prevent conflict. Finally, ideas can be project-based: a single intervention to accomplish a geographically or thematically well-bounded goal, for example a crop insurance instrument for drought-prone areas. The community can also seek to change the design of the Cooperative itself through the 3P process.

Citizen-trustees choose their own teams to build these ideas, and the entire Cooperative community can provide feedback. Ideas may be initiated in private domains, but can only be voted on by the community once the ideas have been made open-source for a sufficient, pre-determined period. The platform makes use of a key feature of open-source peer production: the possibility of “forking” and “merging” ideas. Once an idea is made open-source, other citizens can start their own thread to build on it, in parallel (forking). Modifications made in parallel threads can be reinserted into the original idea with the consent of the idea’s originator (merging), or live a life of their own.

In order to facilitate the evaluation of 3Ps, the community also manages an information repository. The primary objective of this repository is to assess the ongoing and potential impact of 3Ps on the value of each specific collective good—that is, the expected stream of benefits, both economic and non-economic, accruing from these goods over a given time frame. The information repository works like a Wiki, inviting edits and updates from all citizen-trustees. Where critical information gaps need to be filled, the Cooperative will engage citizen-trustees to conduct primary research. Like all aspects of the Cooperative, the information repository is itself a public good.

Experience with peer-production platforms such as GitHub (the main repository for open source software) and Wikipedia suggests that carefully designed reputation metrics enable top-quality output and lively social interactions; they enhance a sense of community and lead to the emergence of influential thought leaders. Participation in the social structure—initiating, developing, and forking ideas, assisting others in problem-solving, and maintaining the information repository, among other tasks—improves citizens’ reputations, as others give their approval; negative actions, meanwhile, can lower reputation. Highly reputable citizen-trustees are entrusted with moderator privileges (i.e., they can flag a proposal as inappropriate, resolve minor disputes, etc.), and their voice, as producers and evaluators of 3Ps, becomes influential in the community.

Overall, this social structure is designed to eliminate the informational and communication-related barriers to collective action. It also provides the foundation for the Cooperative’s political processes, described below.

### How the Cooperative Chooses Solutions: Liquid Democracy

The political structure of the Cooperative is explicitly designed to address some of the most pressing problems of democracy in the world today. Formal and informal veto players at the international and national levels—great powers, heads of state, business interests, etc.—obstruct avenues for global collective action. Direct democracy sometimes leads to majoritarian tyranny, while representative democracy often results in the creation of a professional class of policymakers with little accountability between elections, which gives rise to the threats of collusion and corruption. Citizens lack a source of objective information on which to base decisions; ideological echo chambers reinforce, instead of challenge, pre-existing beliefs. In sum, citizens’ participation in politics all over the world is characterized by feelings of frustration, isolation, and helplessness.

The Cooperative is a delegative “liquid” democracy [26-28]. Decisions are made in three distinct voting processes (see Attachment 2). The first process is the election of individuals to serve on three Councils, called the Council of Peace, the Council of Health, and the Council of Nature. These Councils meet monthly to make final financing decisions for the Cooperative, as explained further below. Each Council has seven seats, and the seven top vote-getters for each Council at the time of the monthly convening serve as Councilors for that session.

Each citizen-trustee has three votes to cast at any given time, one for each Council. They have flexibility in how they cast their votes: they can partition their vote across as many or as few candidates as they wish, and can either vote directly or choose a delegate. For example, a voter may partition her Council of Health vote across two candidates for that body, while voting for single candidates in the Council of Peace and Council of Nature races. Any citizen-trustee whose reputation exceeds a predetermined threshold may run for a council seat at any time; the reputation condition protects the community against unproductive members who may attempt to “buy”—financially or otherwise—delegations to further their own special interests. Finally, any citizen-trustee may choose to delegate part or all of her/his vote to a trusted proxy—an environmental expert, for example, to vote for a Council of Nature candidate.

Another voting process is concerned with 3Ps being developed by the community. As with voting for Councilors, all citizen-trustees vote—either directly or by delegating their vote to a proxy—on the 3Ps they judge to have the greatest potential for managing collective goods effectively. 3Ps that meet a high threshold of support automatically move to the second stage, where they are introduced in one of the three Council bodies for the final voting process.

Within each council, the elected Councilors have the responsibility of choosing a cohesive set of 3Ps for the collective good they are tasked with managing, peace, health, or nature. To allow for such cohesiveness, the Council meets regularly to vote on alterations in the existing structure of collective goods management, including the adoption of new proposals. Updated estimates of the net present value of collective goods are central to the deliberations of the Council bodies. Each Councilor has equal voting power within their respective council, and the minutes of the meeting are public and fully transparent. Overall, the liquid democratic process ensures continuous accountability from Councilors—poor performance results in rapid removal from the Councils—but also opens up the possibility for political and policy continuity, as trusted, effective Councilors are not restricted by term limits. Political behavior is monitored and checked through the power of open-source community vigilance.

Finally, disputes—for instance, when a minority constituency is threatened by a majority-approved 3P—are adjudicated by a High Council consisting of nine members: the five citizen-trustees with the highest reputation, and four individuals nominated by the United Nations General Assembly. The High Council also has the responsibility to ensure that 3Ps do not interfere with states’ sovereignty or violate any other provision of the Constitution of the Global Cooperative (Section 3). If such violations occur, the High Council can block a 3P’s financing, though this 3P can be reintroduced in revised form through the Cooperative’s regular process. With members both internal and external to the Cooperative, the High Council provides an important check to the organization’s liquid-democratic structure, while staying engaged with the broader global governance agenda.

### How the Cooperative Funds Solutions: The Collaborative Economy

The Cooperative’s impact on real-world collective goods comes through its financing of a coordinated set of 3Ps. In order to build the pool of capital necessary for such financing, the Cooperative sells investment shares at a fixed price. In addition to funding 3Ps, the capital raised from shares finances the operations of the Cooperative, including maintenance of the social network, information repository, and so on. The Cooperative will also raise funds to distribute shares to those who cannot afford the share price, concentrating especially on individuals and groups who have a strong real-world reputation for effective collective goods management. The amount of total shares available is unlimited; any capital that the Cooperative cannot meaningfully invest in 3Ps will be placed in a social impact investment portfolio proposed and approved through the Cooperative’s regular process.

3Ps can be managed in partnership with state, market, and civil society actors outside the Cooperative; such partnership must be proposed in the initial design of 3Ps, and thus voted on by all Cooperative members. Social impact bonds (SIBs) are one particularly promising vehicle for Cooperative-public sector partnership [29]. In the SIB model, investors fund socially beneficial projects. These projects, implemented by the public sector (or by contracted intermediaries), then produce social returns which save the public sector money. For example, conflict prevention programs can mitigate later costs in law enforcement and incarceration. Repayment to investors—in this case, the Cooperative—is contingent on social outcomes being achieved.

SIBs are examples of project ideas that may produce a market return while protecting collective goods. Other examples are carbon trading schemes, tourism or patent proceeds from conservation, weather insurance programs, and subsidized water and sanitation systems. The 3P design should specify the expected market return; these estimates are subject to revision by community analysis, based on technical information in the information repository. A portion of 3P-monetized value will be repaid to the Cooperative, which distributes this revenue in the form of dividends to shareholders. In effect, the voting process results in the provision of 3P loans at varying rates of interest, with the rate dependent on expected returns as well as the social value of the 3P. Some loans will demand market-competitive returns; others will have concessional terms.

Some 3Ps—for example, side payments to governments to protect biodiversity—are not expected to generate market returns. These 3Ps nevertheless enhance collective goods. Cooperative members capture some of the benefits, but some benefits are (acceptably) leaked to non-members. This willingness of the Cooperative to bear some of the costs of collective goods management is in line with the ethos of the organization; the Cooperative’s mission is not to maximize value for shareholders, but rather to perform a social function—to restore, safeguard, and enhance collective goods.

From an economic perspective, the councils are tasked with increasing the long-term value of collective goods while generating acceptable shorter-term returns for the Cooperative’s members. The exact value of these short-term returns reflects the judgment of the council members, who, through the direct and delegative voting systems, themselves reflect the values of the Cooperative’s citizens. As revenue from 3Ps increases and the value of cooperation becomes more apparent, choices about the investment portfolio may also change, focusing more on long-term value.

To further increase security and guard against the volatility of global financial markets, transactions are conducted in a digital “cryptocurrency” created specifically for the Cooperative; shares, however, are able to be resold at any point for any currency, at current exchange rates. The underlying distributed database—the “blockchain” [30-31]—provides a secure, transparent record of all transactions, as well as of all other operations of the Cooperative, including votes, delegations, and so on. This cryptocurrency also has the advantage of being strongly tied to the success of the 3Ps. Higher 3P market returns increase the demand for shares—and consequently, demand for the cryptocurrency in which the shares are valued. Greater demand increases the currency’s price, catalyzing a virtuous cycle: better management of the world’s collective goods raises revenue for Cooperative citizens, attracts even more potential shareholders, and thereby enlarges the pool of available capital for investment.


In its vision of a network of individuals sharing ideas, a liquid-democratic voting structure, and common financing of collective goods 3Ps, the Cooperative builds the foundation for a new kind of economy and polity: participatory and geared towards socially valuable work, with rewards coming through not only monetary returns but also social reputation and, importantly, personal fulfillment.

## The Constitution of the Global Cooperative

In this final section, we present a Constitution that summarizes the core principles and operating structure of the Cooperative. This Constitution is in draft form; we envision a process by which all people interested in forming the Cooperative work together to produce a final text. The New Shape Prize will provide the seed money for this process.

### Preamble

Considering that

- All people in the world are entitled to peace—to live lives of security and tranquility, free from the fear of violence;
- All people in the world are entitled to health—to be free from hunger and illness, to be protected from environmental threats, and to have access to high-quality preventative and curative health care;
- All people in the world are entitled to nature: to sustainably enjoy the benefits of ecosystem services—clean air and water, energy, food, recreation, and other resources;

And that

- All states have the right to sovereignty—to exercise control over their territory and provide for their citizens in the manner they choose;

We establish a decentralized organization, the Global Cooperative, to restore, safeguard, and enhance humanity’s collective goods: peace, health, and nature.

### Article 1. General Principles

1.  Fundamental equality. Every woman, man, and child in the world has the same intrinsic value, and the actions of the Cooperative, in its efforts to protect peace, health, and nature, will affirm this fundamental equality. This equality extends into the future: the decisions of the Cooperative will take into account the needs of generations to come.

2.  Individual autonomy. The Cooperative shall advance the right of each individual to think, speak, and act without interference by states or other groups, insofar as actions do not interfere with the rights of other individuals to do the same.

3.  Cooperative action. The Cooperative will be guided by its objective of building a structure in which individuals can safely work together for mutual benefit in social, political, and economic spheres.

### Article 2. Social Rights & Responsibilities

1.  Voting shares and citizen-trusteeship. Each woman and man in the world above the age of 18 is entitled to one voting share that confers the right to participate in the Cooperative as an equal citizen, as well as the responsibility to participate in the trusteeship of the world’s collective goods.

2.  Digital identity. Possessing a voting share allows the citizen-trustee to create an online digital identity. The citizen-trustee’s true demographic information is secure and not publicly available.

3.  Digital access and literacy. Recognizing that access to the Cooperative’s digital infrastructure is partially determined by socioeconomic status, geographical location, and knowledge, the Cooperative has the responsibility of expanding global digital access and digital literacy.

4.  Social network & open-source collaboration. The possession of a voting share also enrolls the citizen-trustee in the Cooperative’s social network, within which s/he has the right to communicate with other citizen-trustees, collaborate on the creation of policies, programs, and projects, and provide feedback on the ideas and actions of the Cooperative community.

5.  Reputation and resilience.  The Cooperative relies on distributed rewards and disincentives; every citizen-trustee may indicate their approval or disapproval of the ideas and actions of others. These evaluations are aggregated into a reputation score that provides a signal to citizen-trustees about the commitment and contribution of each individual to the protection of global collective goods.

6. Access to information. The Cooperative’s citizen-trustees maintain an open-access, freely editable information repository that provides data on the ongoing and estimated impact of policies, programs, and projects on the value of global collective goods. Cooperative members are responsible for quality control of the repository.

### Article 3. Political Rights & Responsibilities

1.  Delegative democracy. Citizen-trustees have the right to either vote directly or delegate their voting power to a trusted proxy. Citizen-trustees may also partition their vote if they wish, spreading their voting power over multiple delegates or Council candidates. Only citizen-trustees who have attained a reputation threshold, to be determined by the Cooperative community, may serve as delegates.

2.   Council structure. The Cooperative will establish three council bodies, one each for peace, health, and nature. Each Council contains seven members with equal voting rights. Again, only citizen-trustees who attain a pre-determined reputation threshold may serve as Councilors.

3.  Council duties. The Councils have the responsibility of meeting once a month to make decisions regarding the coordination and financing of global collective goods 3Ps. The Councils balance the restoration, management, and enhancement of global collective goods with the provision of short-term financial returns to Cooperative shareholders.

4.   First-stage community voting. In the first stage of the voting process, citizen-trustees have the right to approve or disapprove (or abstain on the judgment) of proposed policies, programs, and projects. Citizen-trustees may directly vote or delegate their vote. Policies, programs, and projects that surpass a specified threshold move to the second round of Council voting.

5.   Second-stage Council voting. The leading seven vote-getting delegates every month in each Council election are responsible for making the decisions described in Article 3.3.

6. Accountability. All citizen-trustees have the right of instant recall—withdrawal of delegated votes—at any time before a monthly Council begins session, and again once the monthly Council ends session.

7.  The High Council. Violations of the Constitution, including interference with state sovereignty, as well as major disputes arising between citizen-trustees, are adjudicated by a High Council composed of nine members: the five citizen-trustees with the highest reputation and four individuals nominated by the United Nations General Assembly.

8.  Constitutional reforms. The provisions in the Constitution may be modified by the convening of a special Constitutional Convention. The proposed modifications must first pass a higher threshold than that of regular 3P approval in the first-stage voting procedure described in Article 3.4. The Constitutional Convention is convened when this threshold is exceeded, and all 21 delegates in the three council bodies will vote in the second stage for final ratification of the modifications. Ratification requires a supermajority of 14 of the 21 delegates.

### Article 4. Economic Rights & Responsibilities

1.  Investment shareholding. Every citizen-trustee of the Cooperative has the right to buy additional investment shares. Investment shares are valued in a secure digital currency (see Article 4.6) and are able to be fractionally divided; possession of shares does not increase voting power within the Cooperative.

2.   Distributing free investment shares. The Cooperative has the responsibility of raising money to distribute investment shares freely to those who cannot afford to purchase them, in line with the objective of the Cooperative to include as many citizen-trustees as possible in the collaborative economy.

3.  Long-term social impact. The Cooperative has the responsibility of increasing the value of global collective goods through financing and implementing effective policies, programs, and projects. This may entail funding some initiatives that do not yield a strong monetary return, i.e., providing grants, concessional loans, or side payments to advance the common interests of the Cooperative.

4.  Sustainable returns for shareholders. Where possible and efficient, the Cooperative has the responsibility of creating viable policies, programs, and projects through market mechanisms, and thereby creating financially and environmentally sustainable returns for investment shareholders.

5.  Digital currency. The Cooperative conducts all transactions in a cryptocurrency created specially for the organization.

6.  The blockchain.  All information generated by the Cooperative, including the cryptocurrency, contractual transactions, the contents of the information repository, policy, program, and project designs, and public discussions are stored in a blockchain.


# Assessment Criteria
## Core Values

_Decisions within the governance model must be guided by the good of all humankind and by respect for the equal value of all human beings._

Human welfare depends on the sustainable management of global collective goods: peace, health, and nature. Our proposal creates a new global institution that stewards these transnational goods for the benefit of all citizens by linking the core values of equality and cooperation.

The intrinsic equality of all human beings requires that each individual be given equal power in the management of global collective goods, irrespective of gender, race, or any other characteristic. The Cooperative implements this democratic principle on a global scale: all individuals on the planet are entitled to a free voting share, granting them a voice in all funding and organizational decisions. To maximize flexibility and accountability, and to take advantage of the expertise of particular individuals in particular domains, citizen-trustees exercise this power in a delegative, rather than representative, manner.

Procedural equality, however, is not sufficient to ensure a prosperous future for humanity. The proposed design elevates inter-individual cooperation to a core value and a fundamental governance principle in the creation, curation, and evaluation of collective goods policies, programs, and projects. All members of the Cooperative are allowed—and indeed incentivized—to initiate and edit P3 proposals. The Cooperative is thus a platform for the production of collaborative solutions, providing its members with the opportunity to co-create safeguards against global risks. This new positive liberty—the freedom to cooperate—is central to the emergence of global democracy.

## Decision-Making Capacity

_Decision-making within the governance model must generally be possible without crippling delays that prevent the challenges from being adequately addressed (e.g. due to parties exercising powers of veto)._

The Cooperative contains strong decision-making mechanisms throughout the process of creating, choosing, and financing collective goods 3Ps.

First, the creation of 3Ps in current political systems is usually reserved to political elites, many of whom are not experts in the domain of a specific 3P. By contrast, the Cooperative distributes the creative process across a large community, and allows those with particular expertise to accumulate reputation for their contributions. The decision-making process is thus led by the most knowledgeable, with feedback from the entire population. This obviates the need for expert hearings and other procedures which sometimes slow down the traditional parliamentary process.

Second, final approval of 3Ps occurs through a liquid democratic voting process that again strikes a decision-making balance between universal suffrage and domain expertise. Each individual may participate directly in first-stage voting or delegate their vote to an expert or other trusted proxy—and make such a decision issue by issue. This is in contrast to typical voting procedures, where citizens are asked to vote in infrequent elections for representatives that make decisions across a broad set of issues, many of which may be outside their expertise. Delegative democracy allows for nuanced political preferences to be expressed by the citizenry, which is itself a bulwark against the political polarization afflicting many decision-making systems today; it is also free from electoral cycles, which can interfere with decision-making processes at all scales.

Third, decision-making about financing 3Ps is again handled through a liquid democratic process, instead of being controlled by relatively rigid bureaucracies, as in nation-states and multilateral organizations. Citizen-trustees delegate their vote to Councilors, the most trusted of which make the final decision on financing. The existence of Councils allows for 3Ps to be financed in a coordinated portfolio rather than as isolated projects, which facilitates longer-term thinking about collective goods management. In addition, the small size of these Councils allows for more efficient negotiation and voting. At the same time, however, the delegative structure is highly fluid: ineffective Councilors can be removed at any time based on transparent records of past decisions, and trusted individuals can remain Councilors for extended periods, ensuring a continuity of vision in collective goods management.

## Effectiveness

_The governance model must be capable of handling the global challenges and risks and include means to ensure implementation of decisions._

This proposal asserts that management of collective goods is an essential part of addressing global challenges and risks. It further argues that neither states nor market actors can perform this function effectively, and proposes the creation of a Global Cooperative of citizen-trustees to fill the gap. Within this framework, effective management can be split into three components: (i) the production of relevant, impactful solutions; (ii) a mechanism to generate global consensus around solutions; and (iii) financial resources to fund the implementation of solutions.

The proposed design leverages the powerful mechanism of peer production to produce effective 3P solutions for collective goods management. Peer production is battle-tested in fields such as software development (Linux), knowledge aggregation (Wikipedia), and crypto-economics (Bitcoin), where it has consistently led to high-quality outputs resilient to external attacks and internal errors. Online cooperation between individuals is becoming the dominant mode of production in the information economy, primarily because it has the potential to create more value—in both an informational and financial sense—than more traditional modes of production. In essence, what a closed group of experts or administrators cannot achieve, a coordinated global community can.

The effectiveness of the Cooperative rests not only on its ability to generate ideas, but also to achieve consensus on those ideas and fund them. The Cooperative creates an agile, inclusive, and accountable voting structure based on chains of trust—wherein individuals may pass their vote to experts or trusted proxies—and the ability to instantly withdraw a delegated vote. Such “liquid democracy” has been successfully tested in both political parties [28] and private companies; Google has recently concluded a three-year experiment with the assessment that “it is possible to implement a liquid democracy system on a social network in a scalable manner with a gradual learning curve” [32]. In addition, the Cooperative depends on small groups of knowledgeable, trusted individuals—the Councilors—to lead the process of pulling 3Ps together into a cohesive whole. The combination of popular will and expert leadership leads to a vision for collective goods management that is diverse, adaptive to circumstances, and sustainable—and free from the collective action problem associated with national interests.

Finally, the funding of effective solutions on a global scale requires access to large amounts of capital. We describe how our proposal meets that criterion in the next paragraph.

## Resources and Financing

_The governance model must have sufficient human and material resources at its disposal, and these resources must be financed in an equitable manner._

The Cooperative is designed to mobilize adequate human and financial resources for the management of the world’s collective goods. Its potential to do so far exceeds the capacity of any existing global governance institution. The United Nation Secretariat, for example, employs just over 40 thousand staff; the Cooperative may one day rely on tens (or hundreds) of millions of contributors. Digital infrastructure permits such scale, as evidenced by the immense size of online communities; as of this writing, ten online communities had more than 100 million active users, and another 42 had at least 10 million active users [33].  Even very occasional contributions from such a large community will provide the Cooperative with many orders of magnitude more person-hours towards global governance than is possible in multilateral institutions.  

With respect to financial resources, the Cooperative is a viable savings and investment vehicle for individuals wishing to make a social impact. Global savings equal approximately one-quarter of the gross world product, totaling about $27 trillion [34]; the market capitalization of the world’s stock exchanges is $66 trillion [35]. Only a small fraction of these totals would need to be invested in the Cooperative to build a large investment pool for collective goods 3Ps. Even a $1 trillion/year stock of financial capital would represent a budget nearly 200 times greater than that of the United Nations. Unlike funding from multilateral organizations subject to influence from geopolitical interests, or private foundations that determine their spending priorities without meaningful public input, sourcing capital in this manner is fundamentally equitable: most people on Earth have at least some savings, and are therefore entitled to benefit from the value unlocked by the sound management of global collective goods.

## Trust and Insight

_The trust enjoyed by a successful governance model and its institutions relies on transparency and considerable insight into power structures and decision-making._

Trust is an important component of any robust governance model, but this requirement is particularly critical in distributed systems with a great number of individual actors. This is why every process within the Cooperative is completely transparent: the creation and evaluation of 3Ps, the delegation of voting power to the parliamentary bodies, the decisions made by the bodies, financial transactions, the evolution of reputation, and so on. The framework itself is open-source, as is the information repository and its contents.

Transparency, however, is not sufficient for the emergence of trust. Also necessary are (i) the possibility of win-win situations and (ii) repeated interactions. Win-win situations in the Cooperative exist on two levels: by working together on 3Ps, citizen-trustees can earn reputation and, through improving the quality of ideas, potentially increase the returns on their investment; and by successfully protecting global collective goods, they can improve their quality of life, as well as that of their descendants. The social network infrastructure allows repeated interactions with partners—a gradual construction of community networks over which ideas are shared.

Additionally, the blockchain infrastructure provides what has been called “trustless trust”—trust in the outcome of a process without trust in the parties involved [36]. Because the entire (informational and financial) database of the Cooperative is stored in a decentralized, immutable database, the counterparty risk is low, as is the possibility that an external actor (e.g., a malevolent state) shuts down or otherwise impedes the operations of Cooperative. The $150 billion market capitalization of cryptocurrencies, which are not tied to any real-world assets and whose sole value is the trust that actors place in their distributed blockchain infrastructure, illustrates the importance of this point.

In summary, the proposed governance model aims to establish institutional trust through interpersonal trust. This idea is, arguably, the very foundation of democracy.

## Flexibility

_In order to be able to fulfill its objectives effectively, a successful governance model must contain mechanisms that allow for revisions and improvements to be made to its structure and components._

Current global governance structures lack institutional flexibility, either because of the power of veto players (e.g., the members of the U.N. Security Council) or bureaucratic inertia. The Cooperative avoids these pitfalls by being (i) both transnational and transpartisan, and (ii) non-bureaucratic.

The world’s most powerful nation-states, in many cases, have a strategic interest in preserving the geopolitical status quo, despite its potentially disastrous effects on collective goods. Reform of multilateral institutions, including improvements in decision-making that could facilitate more effective, flexible stewardship of peace, health, and nature, is consequently very difficult. The Cooperative functions on a very different basis. Instead of representing national interests—or special interests and veto players of any kind— it embodies the constant flow of ideas within the human community. Useful revisions of its structure, proposed by any one of its members and collectively selected through the liquid-democratic process, can thus be approved in comparatively very little time. Constitutional revisions, while they do require a supermajority of the three councils, in turn can be passed with the support of just 14 individuals, backed by the delegated power of the Cooperative’s community.

A second key characteristic of the Cooperative is its thin bureaucratic infrastructure. Beyond staffing requirements for the maintenance of the digital infrastructure, the Cooperative employs relatively few full-time workers. This greatly limits the opportunity for vested interests, and ensures that the Cooperative forever remains a public good. Moreover, citizen-trustees and delegates who obstruct the goals of the Cooperative rapidly lose their reputational standing and delegated support.

In contrast to traditional international organizations controlled by nation-states and burdened by ponderous bureaucracies, the Cooperative acts as a lively network of ideas, endowed with a flexible consensus mechanism and vigilant against internal threats of obstruction and vested interest.

## Protection against the Abuse of Power

_A control system must be in place to take action if the organization should overstep its mandate, e.g. by unduly interfering with the internal affairs of nation-states or favouring the special interests of individuals, groups, organizations, states or groups of states._

The Cooperative is a fundamentally inclusive entity, in which every man or woman in the world is entitled to a voice as a citizen-trustee. Moreover, every decision is made through completely transparent processes and involves the consent of the whole community, from the design of 3Ps to their final selection.  For these reasons, the Cooperative is not strongly vulnerable to collusion and the influence of special interests.

However, the Cooperative’s design does contain two layers of protection against the abuse of power, one activated by state jurisdiction and the other by market mechanisms. Firstly, and crucially, all members of the Cooperative remain citizens of their respective countries, and national laws fully apply to them. Any illegal action or declaration by a member will be punished by the states themselves. This applies more broadly to the Cooperative as a whole; ultimately, it exists through the implicit consent of nation-states.

Secondly, the Cooperative has no authority to raise taxes or fund itself without citizen-trustee support; its existence depends on the consent of individuals, as manifest through the buying of investment shares. If the Cooperative proves ineffective at managing the world’s collective goods—or, worse, proves dangerous for the human community as a whole—the withdrawal of capital by investors would immediately halt its operation. The Cooperative has a mandate to exercise governance over global collective goods, yet remains fully accountable through normal market mechanisms.

## Accountability

_It is a fundamental requirement of a successful governance model that it performs the tasks it has been charged with, and the governance model must include the power to hold the decision-makers accountable for their actions._

Accountability is a basic determinant of trust and a necessary safeguard against corruption, collusion, and other actions that would undermine the mission of the Cooperative. The organization has three strong mechanisms in place to ensure accountability, the first for citizen-trustees, the second for Councilors, and the last for the community as a whole.

The primary threat posed by citizen-trustees is in the 3P creation process—the marketing of a 3P that appears to further the Cooperative’s mission, but instead serves special interests. Distributed networks like the Cooperative, however, are resistant to such internal attacks, as is evident in peer-produced projects like Wikipedia. The vigilance of the community ensures that members who attempt to undermine the Cooperative will lose reputation, and thus lose the ability to convincingly advance 3P proposals or “run for office”.

With respect to Councilors, the liquid-democratic structure chosen for the Cooperative provides the highest possible level of accountability: continuous accountability. This means that, should a council member act in ways that favor clearly identified special interests, the community can immediately terminate their role within the council by withdrawing their support. In this way, misguided or unpopular decisions are immediately sanctioned, and untrustworthy delegates replaced.

Finally, the actions of the Cooperative as a whole are checked by the High Council, which contains four externally appointed members. Should a 3P interfere with the sovereignty of a nation-state, or otherwise overstep its mandate to manage the world’s collective goods, a majority vote on the High Council can decide to block its funding from going forward.
